[DOC] Add traces to profiles (#77844)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/shared/datasources/tempo-traces-to-profiles.md

---
headless: true
labels:
  products:
    - enterprise
    - oss
---

[//]: # 'This file documents the Traces to profile configure and usage for the Tempo data source.'
[//]: # 'This shared file is included in these locations:'
[//]: # '/grafana/docs/sources/datasources/tempo/configure-tempo-data-source.md'
[//]: # '/website/docs/grafana-cloud/data-configuration/traces/traces-query-editor.md'
[//]: #
[//]: # 'If you make changes to this file, verify that the meaning and content are not changed in any place where the file is included.'
[//]: # 'Any links should be fully qualified and not relative: /docs/grafana/ instead of ../grafana/.'

<!-- # Trace to profiles  -->

{{< docs/experimental product="Trace to profiles" featureFlag="traceToProfiles" >}}

Using Trace to profiles, you can use Grafana’s ability to correlate different signals by adding the functionality to link between traces and profiles.

**Trace to profiles** lets you link your Grafana Pyroscope data source to tracing data.
When configured, this connection lets you run queries from a trace span into the profile data.

> To use tract to profiles, you must have a configured Grafana Pyroscope data source.

Author: ```suggestion
To use trace to profiles, you must have a configured Grafana Pyroscope data source.
```

1. Select the Pyroscope data source from the **Data source** drop-down.

> 1. Optional: Choose any tags that will be used in the query. If left blank. the default values of `service.name` and `service.namespace` are used.

Author: What are the parameters for the tags? When we say tags, what exactly do we mean?

Reviewer: I think this is explained well in the trace to logs [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/tempo/configure-tempo-data-source/#configure-a-custom-query).

Author: Are the tags for profiles the same as the ones for Trace to logs? The table in the Trace to logs content would be great to include, if it applies.

Reviewer: Yes, we can use the same tags table.

Author: Added.

1. Select one or more profile types to use in the query. Select the drop-down and choose options from the menu.

> 1. Optional: Toggle **Use custom query** to enter a custom query. You can interpolate the configured tags using the `$__tags` keyword.

Author: It would be great if we had a better explanation about the Use custom query some where--maybe before the steps?

Reviewer: There is a useful explanation of [custom query](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/tempo/configure-tempo-data-source/#configure-a-custom-query) in the trace to logs documentation.

1. Select **Save and Test**.

> To use trace to profile, navigate to **Explore** and query a trace. Each span now links to your queries. Clicking a link runs the query in a split panel. If tags are configured, Grafana dynamically inserts the span attribute values into the query. The query runs over the time range currently selected in **Explore**.

Author: This content was copied from the Traces to metrics blog post and modified. Is this correct? 
@joey-grafana Could you add a screenshot to this?

Reviewer: The trace to profiles feature is most like the traces to logs feature. Any documentation should be copied from trace to logs documentation (not trace to metrics).

Also, I've sent you screenshots, please add them wherever you need to :)

Author: Added. Thank you!

[//]: # 'This shared file is included in these locations:'
[//]: # '/grafana/docs/sources/datasources/tempo/configure-tempo-data-source.md'
[//]: # '/website/docs/grafana-cloud/data-configuration/traces/traces-query-editor.md'
[//]: #
[//]: # 'If you make changes to this file, verify that the meaning and content are not changed in any place where the file is included.'
[//]: # 'Any links should be fully qualified and not relative: /docs/grafana/ instead of ../grafana/.'

<!-- # Trace to profiles  -->

{{< docs/experimental product="Trace to profiles" featureFlag="traceToProfiles" >}}

Using Trace to profiles, you can use Grafana’s ability to correlate different signals by adding the functionality to link between traces and profiles.

**Trace to profiles** lets you link your Grafana Pyroscope data source to tracing data.
When configured, this connection lets you run queries from a trace span into the profile data.

There are two ways to configure the trace to profiles feature:

- Use a simplified configuration with default query, or
- Configure a custom query where you can use a template language to interpolate variables from the trace or span.

> To use trace to profile, navigate to **Explore** and query a trace. Each span now links to your queries. Clicking a link runs the query in a split panel. If tags are configured, Grafana dynamically inserts the span attribute values into the query. The query runs over the time range currently selected in **Explore**.

Reviewer: The query runs over the time range of the (span start time - 60) to (span end time + 60 seconds).

Author: ```suggestion
To use trace to profiles, navigate to **Explore** and query a trace. Each span now links to your queries. Clicking a link runs the query in a split panel. If tags are configured, Grafana dynamically inserts the span attribute values into the query. The query runs over the time range of the (span start time - 60) to (span end time + 60 seconds).
```
